Lecture 4

Karel is not gone until the Assignment is done.
Now we use Java.

Computing became automatic in the 1800s with Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine.
Actually his wife Ada made the engine and started programming with it.

Ada Byron was the first programmer, and worked on the Analytical Engine.
	• It wasn't made yet, but she started programming it for use when it came to fruition.

People tend to do this: we start programming computers before they are made so we can prepare for them when the hardware comes available.

1930s/40s had the first electrical computer prototypes.
The first major working one was the ENIAC.

1971: first microprocessor.

What is computer science?
	• It's not just programming
CS = the science/study of problem solving with computational methods/devices

So programming is like the lab work of computer science.

Computers only understand binary (0 and 1).
Machine language is understood by the processor, which translates to binary.
Higher level languages compile down to machine language.

Compilers compile languages. Eclipse itself is a compiler.

Programmers write source code.
Computers use object code, which is compiled source code.
Object files are put together with other object files (from libraries) and come together to executable files.

In Java, this process is a little different.
Source file -> Compiles to class file  (bytecode) -> Link other class files -> JAR (Java archive file) -> Run JAR in JVM

The reason for the JVM is to be platform independent. Compilers must be made for each computer architecture normally.
For Java, the bytecode/JAR is the same for all, so you can give it to everyone that has the JVM running.

Java is an object oriented language.

A class is an encapsulation of behaviors and data.

Classes can inherit from others, where parents are 'superclasses' and children are the 'subclass'.

Instances of classes are objects of classes that can be modified and the modifications do not change the class. Classes can be seen as the template then.

For our Java programs, we're starting with the ACM packages to give us functionality early on.

acm.program library has:
	• ConsoleProgram
	• DialogProgram
	• GraphicsProgram
All programs here are of class Program, which is of class Japplet, which is of class Applet.

In Java, a Console is a window that contains text and interacts with the user.

When you run a program in Java, you run an instance of the main class written in the source file.

GraphicsProgram class:
We'll use the following object classes
	• Collage -> a blank canvas
	• Glabel -> text
	• Grect -> reactangle
	• GOval -> an oval
	• Gline -> a line

To make an instance of a class:
`new className`

To put a GraphicsProgram object on a collage, use `add()`.

Methods are associated with objects, so to run it:
`objectName.method(args);`
